# Honeybee colony ABM

Agent-based modelling project and complexity analysis for Agent-based Models class (2024) @ UvA. This is the corresponding code repository for a research report investigating honey bee colony survival outcomes and emergent adaptation on the colony level in response to weather effects and resource scarcity and distribution.

## Repository structure

This repository has the following file structure:

* `data` folder contains generated data by our experiments
* `figures` folder contains plots and graphs used in our work and generated from the experimental data
* `src` folder contains all of the source code files
  * `model` folder contains source code relating to our Forager Dynamics Agent-based model
    * `agents` folder contains `.py` files corresponding to three types of agents used in the model: `BeeSwarm`, `Hive` and `Resource` and implementing Mesa's [Agent](https://mesa.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_modules/mesa/agent.html#Agent) class
    * `config` folder contains all the constants and default parameter values used in the simulations
      * `BeeswarmConfig.py`, `HiveConfig.py` and `ResourceConfig.py` define constants and default parameters for three types of agents, accordingly
      * `ModelConfig.py` defines additional, global model constants 
      * `VisualConfig.py` contains constants used in JS server visualization
    * `util` folder contains additional utility files that did not fit anywhere else
    * `Model.py` contains the baseline logic of the model itself implementing Mesa's [Model](https://mesa.readthedocs.io/en/latest/_modules/mesa/model.html#Model) class
  * `server` **(TODO: this is wrong for now)** folder contains files related to JS server visualization (see below)

## Environment setup

To set up the environment, we recommend the use of conda ([install conda](https://anaconda.org/anaconda/conda) or [install miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/miniconda-install/)). The environment can then be set up by running `conda env create -f environment.yml`. Then run `conda activate abm-bees` before running any python scripts. Alternatively, the `environment.yml` file can be converted for use with `pip` if preferred.

## JS server visualization

Mesa's [visualization module](https://mesa.readthedocs.io/en/latest/apis/visualization.html) provides functionality for animated simulation of the model. To run the simulation, open the terminal in the root directory of this repo and run `mesa runserver`. This starts the `run.py` file, which opens the server defined in `server.py`. Files `simple_continuous_canvas.js` and `SimpleContinuousModule.py` are used to visualize Mesa's [ContinuousSpace](https://mesa.readthedocs.io/en/latest/apis/space.html#mesa.space.ContinuousSpace) grid.

## Reproducing the experiments

Experiments described in our work are located in the root folder of the project. Simply run the experiment with the corresponding name to recreate the experiment of interest. Keep in mind, that running all experiments may take a couple of hours / days depending on your machine hardware. By default, some experiments may load pre-generated data from the `data` directory. This can be turned of within the code file itself. Visualizations of the data generated by experiments is done in the `results.ipynb` notebook.